["This book is about Warren Buffett and his stock market experience. ccTo all you fellow ring-kissers I would like to talk today about the stock marketd he said. cI will be talking about pricing stocks but I will not be talking about predicting their course of action next month or next year. Valuing is not the same as predicting. cIn the short run the market is a voting machine. In the long run its a weighing machine. cWeight counts eventually. But votes count in the short term. And its a very undemocratic way of voting. Unfortunately they have no literacy tests in terms of voting qualifications as youve all learned.d Buffett clicked a button which illuminated a PowerPoint slide on a huge screen to his right.17 Bill Gates sitting in the audience caught his breath for a second until the notoriously fumble-fingered Buffett managed to get the first slide up.18 DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE December 31 16  87 .12 December 31 181 875.00 He walked over to the screen and started explaining. During these seventeen years the size of the economy grew fivefold. The sales of the Fortune five hundred companies grew more than fivefold. Yet during these seventeen years the stock market went exactly nowhere.d He backed up a step or two. cWhat youre doing when you invest is deferring consumption and laying money out now to get more money back at a later time. And there are really only two questions. One is how much youre going to get back and the other is when. Now Aesop was not much of a finance major because he said something like A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush. But he doesnt say when.d Interest rates the cost of borrowing Buffett explained are the price of cwhen.d They are to finance as gravity is to physics. As interest rates vary the value of all financial assets houses stocks bonds changes as if the price of birds had fluctuated. cAnd thats why sometimes a bird in the hand is better than two birds in the bush and sometimes two in the bush are better than one in the hand.d In his flat breathy twang the words coming so fast that they sometimes ran over one another Buffett related Aesop to the great bull market of the 10s which he described as baloney. Profits had grown much less than in that previous period but birds in the bush were expensive because interest rates were low. Fewer people wanted cash the bird in the hand at such low rates. So investors were paying unheard-of prices for those birds in the bush. Casually Buffett referred to this as the cgreed factor.d The audience full of technology gurus who were changing the world while getting rich off the great bull market sat silent. They were perched atop portfolios that were jam-packed with stocks trading at extravagant valuations. They felt terrific about that. It was a new paradigm this dawning of the Internet age. Their attitude was that Buffett had no right to call them greedy. Warren whod hoarded his money for years and given very little away who was so cheap his license plate said cThriftyd who spent most of his time thinking about how to make money who had blown the technology boom and missed the boat was spitting in their champagne. cBuffett continued. There were only three ways the stock market could keep rising at ten percent or more a year. One was if interest rates fell and remained below historic levels. The second was if the share of the economy that went to investors as opposed to employees and government and other things rose above its already historically high level.1 Or he said the economy could start growing faster than normal.20 He called it cwishful thinkingd to use optimistic assumptions like these. Some people he said were not thinking that the whole market would flourish. They just believed they could pick the winners from the rest. Swinging his arms like an orchestra conductor he succeeded in putting up another slide while explaining that although innovation might lift the world out of poverty people who invest in innovation historically have not been glad afterward. cThis is half of a page which comes from a list seventy pages long of all the auto companies in the United States.d He waved the complete list in the air. cThere were two thousand auto companies: the most important invention probably of the first half of the twentieth century. It had an enormous impact on peoples lives. If you had seen at the time of the first cars how this country would develop in connection with autos you would have said 8This is the place I must be. But of the two thousand companies as of a few years ago only three car companies survived.21 And at one time or another all three were selling for less than book value which is the amount of money that had been put into the companies and left there. So autos had an enormous impact on America but in the opposite direction on investors.d He put down the list to shove his hand in his pocket. cNow sometimes its much easier to figure out the losers. There was I think one obvious decision back then. And of course the thing you should have been doing was shorting horses.d*3 Click. A slide about horses popped up. U.S. HORSE POPULATION 100 17 million 18 5 million cFrankly Im kind of disappointed that the Buffett family was not shorting horses throughout this entire period. There are always losers.d Members of the audience chuckled albeit faintly. Their companies might be losing money but in their hearts beat a conviction that they were winners supernovas blazing at the cusp of a momentous shift in the heavens. Undoubtedly their names would grace the pages of history books someday. Click. Another slide appeared. cNow the other great invention of the first half of the century was the airplane. In this period from 11 to 13 there were about two hundred companies. Imagine if you could have seen the future of the airline industry back there at Kitty Hawk. You would have seen a world undreamed of. But assume you had the insight and you saw all of these people wishing to fly and to visit their relatives or run away from their relatives or whatever you do in an airplane and you decided this was the place to be. cAs of a couple of years ago there had been zero money made from the aggregate of all stock investments in the airline industry in history. cSo I submit to you: I really like to think that if I had been down there at Kitty Hawk I would have been farsighted enough and public-spirited enough to have shot Orville down. I owed it to future capitalists.d22 Another light chuckle. Some were getting tired of these musty old examples. But out of respect they let Buffett get on with it. cNow he was talking about their businesses. cIts wonderful to promote new industries because they are very promotable. Its very hard to promote investment in a mundane product. Its much easier to promote an esoteric product even particularly one with losses because theres no quantitative guideline.d This was goring the audience directly where it hurt. cBut people will keep coming back to invest you know. It reminds me a little of that story of the oil prospector who died and went to heaven. And St. Peter said 8Well I checked you out and you meet all of the qualifications. But theres one problem. He said 8We have some tough zoning laws up here and we keep all of the oil prospectors over in that pen. And as you can see it is absolutely chock-full. There is no room for you. cAnd the prospector said 8Do you mind if I just say four words? cSt. Peter said 8No harm in that. cSo the prospector cupped his hands and yells out 8Oil discovered in hell! cAnd of course the lock comes off the cage and all of the oil prospectors start heading right straight down. cSt. Peter said 8Thats a pretty slick trick. So he says 8go on in make yourself at home. All the room in the world. cThe prospector paused for a minute then said 8No I think Ill go along with the rest of the boys. There might be some truth to that rumor after all. 23 cWell thats the way people feel with stocks. Its very easy to believe that theres some truth to that rumor after all.d This got a mild laugh for a half second which choked off as soon as the audience caught on to Buffetts point which was that like the prospectors they might be mindless enough to follow rumors and drill for oil in hell. He closed by returning to the proverbial bird in the bush. There was no new paradigm he said. Ultimately the value of the stock market could only reflect the output of the economy. He put up a slide to illustrate how for several years the markets valuation had outstripped the economys growth by an enormous degree. This meant Buffett said that the next seventeen years might not look much better than that long stretch from 16  to 181 when the Dow had gone exactly nowhere that is unless the market plummeted. cIf I had to pick the most probable return over that periodd he said cit would probably be six percent.d2  Yet a recent PaineWebber-Gallup poll had shown that investors expected stocks to return thirteen to twenty-two percent.25 He walked over to the screen. Waggling his bushy eyebrows he gestured at the cartoon of a naked man and woman taken from a legendary book on the stock market Where Are the Customers Yachts?26 cThe man said to the woman 8There are certain things that cannot be adequately explained to a virgin either by words or pictures.d The audience took his point which was that people who bought Internet stocks were about to get screwed. They sat in stony silence. Nobody laughed. Nobody chuckled or snickered or guffawed. Seeming not to notice Buffett moved back to the podium and told the audience about the goody bag he had brought for them from Berkshire Hathaway. cI just bought a company that sells fractional jets NetJetsd he said. cI thought about giving each of you a quarter share of a Gulfstream IV. But when I went to the airport I realized thatd be a step down for most of you.d At that they laughed. So he continued he was giving each of them a jewelers loupe instead which he said they should use to look at one anothers wives rings the third wives especially. That hit its mark. The audience laughed and applauded. Then they stopped. A resentful undercurrent was washing through the room. Sermonizing on the stock markets excesses at Sun Valley in 1 was like cpreaching chastity in a house of ill repute. The speech might rivet the audience to its chairs but that didnt mean that they would go forth and abstain. Yet some thought they were hearing something important. cThis is great; its the basic tutorial on the stock market all in one lessond thought Gates.27 The money managers many of whom were hunting for cheaper stocks found it comforting and even cathartic. Buffett waved a book in the air. cThis book was the intellectual underpinning of the 12 stock-market mania. Edgar Lawrence Smiths Common Stocks as Long Term Investments proved that stocks always yielded more than bonds. Smith identified five reasons but the most novel of these was the fact that companies retained some of their earnings which they could reinvest at the same rate of return. That was the plowback a novel idea in 12 ! But as my mentor Ben Graham always used to say 8You can get in way more trouble with a good idea than a bad idea because you forget that the good idea has limits. Lord Keynes in his preface to this book said 8There is a danger of expecting the results of the future to be predicted from the past.d28 He had worked his way back around to the same subject: that one couldnt extrapolate from the past few years of accelerating stock prices. cNow is there anyone I havent insulted?d2 He paused. The question was rhetorical; nobody raised a hand. cThank youd he said and ended. cPraise by name criticize by categoryd was Buffetts rule. The speech was meant to be provocative not off-putting for he cared a great deal what they thought of him. He had named no culprits and he assumed they would get over his jokes. His argument was so powerful almost unassailable that he thought even those who didnt like its message must acknowledge its force. And whatever unease the audience felt was not expressed aloud. He answered questions until the session ended. People began to stand awarding him an ovation. No matter how they saw it a masterful exposition on how to think about investing or the last roar of an old lion the speech was by any standard a tour de force. Buffett had stayed on top for forty-four years in a business where five years of good performance was a meaningful accomplishment. Still as the record lengthened the question always loomed: When would he falter? Would he declare an end to his reign or would some seismic shift dethrone him? Now it seemed to some the time had come. It may have taken an invention as significant as the personal computer coupled with a technology as pervasive as the Internet to topple him but hed apparently overlooked information that was freely available and rejected the reality of the approaching millennium. As they muttered a polite cwonderful speech Warrend the young lions prowled restive. And so even in the ladies room at the break sarcastic remarks were heard from the Silicon Valley wives.30 It was not just that Buffett was wrong as some felt but that even if he were eventually proved right as others suspected he would be his dour prediction of the investing future contrasted so sharply with Buffetts own legendary past. For in his early glory days stocks were cheap and Buffett had scooped them up in handfuls almost alone in noticing the golden apples lying untouched on the path. As the years passed barriers grew up that made it harder to invest to get an edge to figure out what others didnt know. So who was Buffett to preach at them now that it was their turn? Who was he to say that they shouldnt make money while they could off this wonderful market? Throughout the rest of the lazy afternoon Herbert Allens guests played one last game of tennis or golf or headed to the Duck Pond Lawn for a leisurely chat. Buffett spent his afternoon with old friends who congratulated him on his triumph of a speech. He believed he had done a convincing job of swaying the audience. He had not given a speech full of such commanding evidence simply to go on the record. Buffett who wanted to be liked had registered the standing ovation not the mutterings. But the less flattering version was how many were not convinced. They believed that Buffett was rationalizing having missed the technology boom and they were startled to see him make such specific predictions prophecies cthat surely would turn out to be wrong. Beyond his earshot the rumbling went on: cGood ol Warren. He missed the boat. How could he miss the tech boat? Hes a friend of Bill Gates.d31 A few miles away at the River Run Lodge later that evening with the guests at the closing dinner again arranged according to some invisible plan Herbert Allen finally spoke thanking various people and reflecting on the week. Then Susie Buffett took the stage beside the windows that overlooked the pebbly Big Wood River and once again sang the old standards. Later the guests returned to the Sun Valley Lodge terrace where Olympic skaters axeled and arabesqued in the Saturday night ice show. By the time fireworks exploded across the sky at evenings end Sun Valley  had been declared another glorious five-day extravaganza. Yet what most people would remember was not the rafting or the skaters; it was Buffetts talk about the stock market the first forecast he had made in exactly thirty years. 3 Creatures of Habit Pasadena a2 July 1 Buffetts partner Charles T. Munger was nowhere to be seen at Sun Valley. The Allen & Co. organizers had never invited him. Which was fine with Munger for Sun Valley was the kind of event he would almost pay not to attend. Its rituals required pleasing too many people.1 Buffett was the one who enjoyed pleasing people. Even as he took his jabs at the audience he made sure to remain personally well liked. Whereas Munger wanted only respect and didnt care who thought he was a son of a bitch. Yet the two in many peoples minds were almost interchangeable. Buffett himself referred to them as cSiamese twins practically.d They walked with the same lurching awkward gait. They wore the same sort of gray suits draped stiffly over their frames the inflexible bodies of men who have spent decades reading books and newspapers rather than playing sports or working outdoors. They arranged their graying hair in the same comb-over they wore similar Clark Kentish glasses and the same intensity flickered through their eyes. They thought alike and had the same fascination with business as a puzzle worth spending a lifetime to solve. Both regarded rationality and honesty as the highest virtues. Quickened pulses and self-delusion in their view were the major causes of mistakes. They liked to ponder the reasons for failure as a way of deducing the rules of success. cI had long looked for insight by inversion in the intense manner counseled by the great algebraist Carl Jacobid Munger said. c8Invert always invert.d He illustrated this with the story of a wise peasant who said cTell me where Im going to die so I wont go there.d2 But while Munger meant this figuratively Buffett took it more literally. He lacked Mungers subtle sense of fatalism particularly when it came to the subject of his own mortality. Both men however were infected by the urge to preach. Munger described himself as cdidactic.d He labored over occasional speeches on the art of successful living which struck people as so insightful that they were hoarded and passed from hand to hand until finally the Internet made them accessible to all. He grew so enthused delivering these speeches that on a few occasions he became cself-intoxicatedd as Buffett put it and had to be dragged from the stage. In private Munger tended to lecture either himself or his audience making conversations with him like sitting in the back of a runaway stagecoach. But while he considered himself an amateur scientist and architect and did not hesitate to expound on Einstein Darwin rational habits of thinking and the ideal distance between houses in a Santa Barbara subdivision Munger was nonetheless wary of venturing very far from what he had spent some time to learn. cHe dreaded falling prey to what a Harvard Law School classmate of his had called cthe Shoe Button Complex.d cHis father commuted daily with the same group of mend Munger said. cOne of them had managed to corner the market in shoe buttons a really small market but he had it all. He pontificated on every subject all subjects imaginable. Cornering the market on shoe buttons made him an expert on everything. Warren and I have always sensed it would be a big mistake to behave that way.d3 Buffett was in no danger of suffering from the Shoe Button Complex. He feared appearing obnoxious or worse sanctimonious. He believed in what he called the Circle of Competence drew a line around himself and stayed within the three subjects on which he would be recognized as absolutely expert: money business and his own life. Yet like Munger he had his own form of self-intoxication. While Munger chose his speeches selectively but had trouble winding them up Buffett could usually conclude a lecture but found it hard not to start one. He gave speeches; he wrote articles; he wrote editorials; he gathered people at parties and gave little lessons; he testified in lawsuits; he appeared in television documentaries and did television interviews and took journalists along with him on trips; he went around to colleges and taught classes; he got college students to come and visit him; he gave lessons at the openings of furniture stores the inauguration of insurance telemarketing centers and dinners for would-be customers of NetJets; he gave locker-room talks to football players; he spoke at lunches with Congressmen; he educated newspaper folk in editorial board meetings; he gave lessons to his own board of directors; and above all he put on the teachers robes in his letters to and meetings with his shareholders. Berkshire Hathaway was his cSistine Chapeld not just a work of art but an illustrated text of his beliefs which was why Munger referred to it as Buffetts cdidactic enterprise.d The two men had been each others best audience ever since they first met through mutual friends over lunch in 15. After they talked their hosts into exhaustion they wound up alone at the table jabbering to each other. Since then they had carried on an uninterrupted conversation for decades. Eventually they could read each others minds stopped talking and carried on by telepathy. But by then their other audiences had expanded to include their friends business partners shareholders indeed the whole world. People reeled out of Buffetts office or away from Mungers speeches figuratively smacking their foreheads and saying cMy God!d at some insight one of them had about a seemingly intractable problem which now in hindsight seemed obvious. No matter how much either talked demand for their words only increased. Like most things in their lives they found this role easy and comfortable engraved in their beings by long habit. But accused of being a creature of habit Buffett responded with a wounded look. cIm not a creature of habitd he said. cNow Charlie Charlie is a creature of habit.d * * * Munger rose in the morning and set his quarter-inch-thick old-fashioned cataract glasses on the bridge of his nose. He climbed into his car at precisely the same time every day carefully placed his fathers briefcase  which he now used on the seat next to him and drove from Pasadena to downtown Los Angeles.  He changed lanes on his left side by counting the cars in his rearview mirror then watching them pass in the front to sense when there would be a gap.5 (For years he drove with a can of gasoline in his trunk in case he forgot to stop for gas but was finally persuaded to give up this particular habit.) Once downtown he often met someone for breakfast at the sandy-brick art deco California Club one of the citys venerable institutions where he strode automatically to the first table in the dining room after grabbing a clutch of newspapers from the console table by the third-floor elevator. He tore through the papers like gift wrap on Christmas morning until they lay around him in a heap. cGood morning Mr. Munger.d The members of the L.A. business establishment genuflected as they passed by on their way to lesser tables pleased if he recognized them and chatted for a moment or two. cMunger regarded them through his right eye. His left had been destroyed in a failed cataract operation.6 Now while he spoke his left eyelid hung at half-mast as his head swiveled back and forth across the room taking in the scene. The rotating half gaze gave him an aspect of eternal vigilance and permanent disdain. After finishing his blueberries Munger repaired to the modest cluttered office he rented from Munger Tolles & Olson the law firm he had founded in 162 and retired from just three years later. Tucked away on an upper floor of the Wells Fargo Center his domain was watched over by his longtime secretary the Teutonic Dorothe Obert. There surrounded by science and history books biographies of Benjamin Franklin an enormous portrait of aphorist and lexicographer Samuel Johnson plans and models of his latest real estate deal and a hydrocephalic bust of Franklin next to the windows he felt at home. Munger admired Franklin for espousing Protestant bourgeois values while living as he damn well pleased. He frequently cited Franklin and spent his days studying his works and those of other ceminent deadd as he put it like Cicero and Maimonides. He also administered Wesco Financial a subsidiary of Berkshire; the Daily Journal Corporation a legal publishing company that Wesco owned; and worked on a real estate transaction here and there. Would-be chatterers except for family close friends or business associates met with obscure ironic witticisms and discouragement from Dorothe. Munger spent much of his time working on four causes. When he chose he could pitch in with an almost stunning generosity. However lacking a soft spot for the people of what he called cDregsvilled his charity took the form of a Darwinian quest to boost the brightest. Good Samaritan Hospital the Harvard-Westlake School the Huntington Library and the Stanford Law School were the beneficiaries. These organizations knew that Mungers money and effort would be accompanied by much lecturing and insistence that everyone do things Charlies way. He would gladly pay for dormitories at Stanford Law School as long as Stanford made each room exactly so many feet wide with a window exactly here and the bedroom so many feet from the kitchen and provided that the university locate the parking garage where he insisted. He embodied old-fashioned noblesse oblige with all sorts of irritating strings attached to the money for the recipients own good because he knew best. Even with all this overseeing of others activities Munger often left for the day in time to play a little golf with his cronies at the Los Angeles Country Club. Then he joined his wife Nancy for dinner sometimes at the Pasadena house hed designed himself or more likely with a longtime group of close-knit friends once again either at the California Club or the L.A. Country Club. He concluded his day by burying his nose in a book. He vacationed regularly with his eight children and stepchildren and assorted grandchildren usually at his cabin on Minnesotas Star Island where like his father he was an avid fisherman. He hosted dozens of people on his enormous catamaran the Channel Cat (described as a cfloating restaurantd by one friend and used mainly to entertain). In short despite his idiosyncrasies Munger was a straightforward family man who liked his friends his clubs and his charities. * * * Buffett liked his friends and his clubs but had little to do with charities. His life was even simpler than Mungers despite a personality that was far more complex. He spent the vast majority of his time in Omaha but his schedule revolved around a series of board meetings and trips to visit friends orchestrated with an unhurried regularity like the phases of the moon. On the days he was in town he drove 1.5 miles from the house hed inhabited for four decades to the office at Kiewit Plaza that hed occupied for almost as long where he sat down behind his fathers desk by eight-thirty a.m. There he turned on the television to CNBC with the sound muted before picking up his pile of newspapers keeping half an eye on the screen while plowing through a pile of publications on his desk: American Banker Editor & Publisher Broadcasting Beverage Digest Furniture Today A.M. Bests Property-Casualty Review the New Yorker Columbia Journalism Review the New York Observer and newsletters from writers he admired on the stock and bond market. After that he digested the monthly weekly and daily reports faxed mailed and e-mailed by the businesses cthat Berkshire owned a list that grew longer year by year telling him how many auto policies GEICO had sold last week and how many claims it had paid; how many pounds of Sees Candies had sold yesterday; how many prison-guard uniforms had been ordered from Fechheimers; how many jet time-shares NetJets was selling in Europe and the United States; and all the rest awnings battery chargers kilowatt hours air compressors engagement rings leased trucks encyclopedias pilot training home furnishings cardiopulmonary equipment pig stalls boat loans real estate listings ice cream sundaes winches and windlasses cubic feet of gas sump pumps vacuum cleaners newspaper advertising egg counters knives furniture rentals nurses shoes electromechanical components. All the numbers on their costs and sales poured into his office and he knew many of them from memory.7 In his spare time he pored over reports from the hundreds of companies he hadnt bought yet. Partly out of interest and partly just in case. If some dignitary made the pilgrimage to Omaha to meet him he got in his steel-blue Lincoln Town Car and drove the 1.5 miles through downtown and out to the airport to pick him or her up personally. People were startled and charmed by the unaffected gesture although he soon scraped their nerves raw by barely noticing stop signs traffic lights or other cars weaving around the road while talking animatedly. He rationalized his distractedness by saying that he drove so slowly that if he had an accident the damage would be light.8 He always gave a tour of his office showing off his totems the memorabilia that told the story of his business life. Then he sat leaning forward in a chair hands clasped and eyebrows raised sympathetically as he listened to the visitors questions and requests. To each of them Buffett offered off-the-cuff wit quick decisions on business proposals and warm advice. As they left he might surprise a famous politician or the CEO of some huge company by dropping in for lunch at McDonalds before ferrying him back to the airport. In between the reading the research and the occasional meetings the phone rang all day long. First-time callers punching in Buffetts number were shocked to hear a hearty cHello!d and often stumbled in confusion when they realized that he answered his own phone. His secretary the amiable Debbie Bosanek trotted in and out of his office with messages from the overflow calls. On his credenza another phone rang from time to time. He took these calls instantly for they were from his trader. cYelloa6mmm hmma6yepa6how mucha6mmm hmma6go aheadd he would say and hang up. Then he turned back to the other calls or to his reading or CNBC before leaving promptly at five-thirty p.m. for home. The woman waiting for him there was not his wife. He was perfectly open about Astrid Menks with whom he had lived in an unusual triangular arrangement since 178. Susie Buffett approved of and in fact had arranged the relationship; yet he and Susie both made a great point of saying how very married they were their routine as a couple as scheduled and orchestrated as everything else in Buffetts life. All the while he offered no more explanation in public than cIf you knew everybody well youd understand it quite well.d While this was true in its way it did not help the curious since almost nobody knew both Susie and Astrid well or for that matter Buffett himself. He kept these relationships separate as he kept many of his relationships separate. By all appearances however Astrid and Susie were friends. Most nights Buffett ate dinner something like a hamburger or pork chop at home with Astrid. After a couple of hours he turned his attention to his nightly bridge game on the Internet to which he devoted about twelve hours a week. While he tapped away glued to the screen with the background noise of the TV Astrid mostly left him to his game except when occasionally he said cAstrid get me a Coke!d Afterward he usually talked to Sharon Osberg his bridge partner and a close confidante for a while on the phone as Astrid puttered around the house until ten when Buffett had his nightly conference call with Ajit Jain who ran his reinsurance business. Meanwhile Astrid went to the market and picked up the early edition of the next days newspaper. While he read it she went to bed. And that it seemed was the simple ordinary life of a megabillionaire.   cWarren Whats Wrong? Omaha and Atlanta a2 August3December 1 Nearly all of Buffetts $30 billion plus ninety-nine percent was invested in the stock of Berkshire Hathaway. He had spoken at Sun Valley about how the markets weighing machine was more important than its voting machine. But it was the voting machines opinion of his stock price that set the altitude from which he preached. People paid attention to him because he was rich. So when he predicted that the market could disappoint investors for seventeen years1 he was standing on the edge of a cliff and he knew it. If he was wrong not only would he be the laughingstock of Sun Valley; in the record books of the worlds wealthiest men his personal rank might drop. And Buffett paid close attention to that rank. Through the late 10s BRK (Berkshire Hathaways stock symbol) had boosted his profile by outpacing the market until it peaked at $8000 per share in June 18. That a single share of Berkshire stock cost enough to buy a small condo was unique among American businesses. To Buffett the stock price represented an uncomplicated measure of his success. It had grown in an ascending line since the day he first bought BRK for $7.50 a share. Even though the market had rocked through the late 10s until 1 an investor who bought BRK and held on to it would have been better off. But now Buffett found himself standing on the sinking platform of an unloved stock watching the cT&Td(tech and telecommunications) stocks ascend. By August 1 BRK had slumped to $65000. How much should someone pay for a large established business that returned $ 00 million to them in profits every year? How much for a small new business that was losing money? a2 Toys cRd Us was earning $ 00 million a year and had sales of $11 billion. a2 eToys was losing $123 million a year and had sales of $100 million. The markets voting machine said that eToys was worth $ . billion and Toys cRd Us was worth about a billion less than that. The presumption was that eToys was going to crush Toys cRd Us through the Internet.3 The one cloud of doubt that hung over the market concerned the calendar. Experts were predicting that disaster might strike at midnight December 31 1 because the worlds computers were not programmed to handle dates beginning with a c2.d Fearing panic the Federal Reserve began to increase the supply of money rapidly to prevent cash shortages in case all the countrys ATMs froze at once. Thus turbocharged shortly after Sun Valley the market had spiraled upward like a Fourth of July firecracker. If you had invested a dollar in January in the NASDAQ an index full of technology stocks your bet was now worth a buck twenty-five. The same bet in BRK was worth only eighty cents. By December the Dow Jones Industrial Average closed the year up twenty-five percent. The NASDAQ blasted through the  000-point level up an incredible eighty-six percent. BRK fell to $56100. In just a few months BRKs lead for the past five years had been tsunamied. For more than a year financial pundits had made sport of Buffett a has-been an emblem of the past. Now con the eve of the millennium Barrons a weekly must-read on Wall Street put Buffett on its cover with the headline cWarren Whats Wrong?d The accompanying article said Berkshire had cstumbledd badly. He was running a Pamplona of negative press like nothing he had ever experienced. cI know its going to changed he repeated over and over cI just dont know when.d  His shrilling nerves were urging him to fight back. Instead he did nothing. He did not respond. Near the end of 1 even many longtime cvalue investorsd who followed Buffetts style had either shuttered their businesses or given in and bought technology stocks. Buffett did not. What he called his Inner Scorecard a toughness about financial decisions that had infused him for as long as anyone could remember kept him from wavering. cI feel like Im on my back and theres the Sistine Chapel and Im painting away. I like it when people say 8Gee thats a pretty good-looking painting. But its my painting and when somebody says 8Why dont you use more red instead of blue? Good-bye. Its my painting. And I dont care what they sell it for. The painting itself will never be finished. Thats one of the great things about it.5 cThe big question about how people behave is whether theyve got an Inner Scorecard or an Outer Scorecard. It helps if you can be satisfied with an Inner Scorecard. I always pose it this way. I say: 8Lookit. Would you rather be the worlds greatest lover but have everyone think youre the worlds worst lover? Or would you rather be the worlds worst lover but have everyone think youre the worlds greatest lover? Now thats an interesting question. cHeres another one. If the world couldnt see your results would you rather be thought of as the worlds greatest investor but in reality have the worlds worst record? Or be thought of as the worlds worst investor when you were actually the best? cIn teaching your kids I think the lesson theyre learning at a very very early age is what their parents put the emphasis on. If all the emphasis is on what the worlds going to think about you forgetting about how you really behave youll wind up with an Outer Scorecard. Now my dad: He was a hundred percent Inner Scorecard guy. cHe was really a maverick. But he wasnt a maverick for the sake of being a maverick. He just didnt care what other people thought. My dad taught me how life should be lived. Ive never seen anybody quite like him.d PART TWO The Inner Scorecard c5 The Urge to Preach Nebraska a2 1863128 John Buffett the first known Buffett in the New World was a serge weaver believed to be of French Huguenot descent. He fled to America in the seventeenth century to escape religious persecution and settled in Huntington Long Island as a farmer. Little else is known of the earliest Buffetts in the United States except that they were farmers.1 It is clear however that Warren Buffetts urge to preach is part of a family legacy. An early example was one of John Buffetts sons2 remembered for sailing north across the Long Island Sound to a coastal settlement in Connecticut where he climbed a hill and commenced to preach religion to the heathens. But it is doubtful that the outcasts scofflaws and unbelievers of Greenwich repented on hearing his words since history records that lightning promptly struck him down. Several generations later Zebulon Buffett a farmer in Dix Hills Long Island left his trace on the family tree as the first recorded exemplar of another Buffett trait treating ones own relatives with extreme tightfistedness when his grandson Sidney Homan Buffett quit his job working on Zebulons farm in disgust over the insultingly low pay. A gangly teenager Sidney went west to Omaha Nebraska to join his maternal grandfather George Homan in his livery-stable business.3 The year was 1867; Omaha a settlement consisting mainly of a collection of wooden shacks. Since its days as a trail-outfitting center for westbound prospectors during the Gold Rush Omaha supplied the staples to pioneers gambling women and booze.  But with the end of the Civil War it was about to be transformed. A grand transcontinental railroad would link the coasts of the newly reunited states for the first time and Abraham Lincoln himself decreed that Omaha would be the railroads headquarters. The coming of the Union Pacific filled the town with a bustling commercial spirit as well as a sense of destiny. Nonetheless the place retained its reputation as the Sodom of a pious state5 and a well-known crogues rookery.d After working at the livery stable Sidney left to open the first grocery store in a town with no paved streets. In this respectable but modest business he sold fruit vegetables and game until eleven every night: prairie chickens for a quarter jackrabbits for a dime.6 His grandfather Zebulon feared for Sidneys prospects and pelted him with letters containing advice all rules that with one significant exception his descendents still heed. cTry to be punctual in all your dealings. You will find it difficult to get along with some men deal as little as possible with sucha6. Save your credit for that is better than moneya6. If you go on in business be content with moderate gains. Dont be too hasty to get too richa6. I want you to live so as to be fit to live and fit to die.d 7 Content with moderate gains in an upward-scrambling freewheeling place Sidney gradually built the store into a success.8 He married Evelyn Ketchum and they had six children several of whom died young. Two sons Ernest and Frank were among the survivors. It has been said cNo man was ever better named than Ernest Buffett.d10 Born in 1877 he ended his formal cschooling in the eighth grade and joined his father behind the counter during the Panic of 183. Far more eccentric than his businesslike brother Frank Buffett became a large stove-bellied man the heathen among the Puritans of the family who even enjoyed the occasional drink. One day a stunning young woman appeared at the store looking for a job. Her name was Henrietta Duvall and she had traveled to Omaha to escape an unfriendly stepmother.11 Frank and Ernest were both immediately smitten but it was the more handsome Ernest who won Henrietta as his wife in 188. Ernest and Henriettas first child Clarence was born within a year of their marriage followed by three more sons and a daughter. Shortly after the quarrel Ernest went into a partnership with his father Sidney; eventually he left to set up another grocery store. Frank remained single for most of his life and for the next twenty-five years as long as Henrietta lived he and Ernest apparently never spoke. Ernest set about becoming a pillar of the town. At his new store the chours were long pay low opinions cast in iron and foolishness zero.d12 Always dressed in a dapper suit he scowled from his desk on the mezzanine to stop his employees from idling and penned letters demanding that suppliers ckindly speed up the celery.d13 He charmed his lady customers but never hesitated to judge and carried a little black notebook to write down the names of people who irritated him Democrats and people who didnt pay their grocery bills.1  Ernest was sure that the world needed his opinion and traveled to conferences around the country to bemoan the sorry state of the nation with like-minded businessmen.15 cSelf-doubt was not his strong suit. He always spoke in exclamation points and expected you to acknowledge that he knew bestd says Buffett. In a letter to his son and daughter-in-law advising them to always have some ready cash he described the Buffetts as bourgeois incarnate: cI might mention that there has never been a Buffett who ever left a very large estate but there has never been one that did not leave something. They never spent all they made but always saved part of what they made and it has all worked out pretty well.d16 cSpend less than you maked could in fact have been the Buffett family motto if accompanied by its corollary cDont go into debt.d Henrietta also of French Huguenot extraction was as thrifty iron-willed and teetotaling as her husband. A devout Campbellite*  she too felt the call to preach. While Ernest was at the store she would harness the horses to the familys fringed surrey and gather her children to drive out into the countryside where she knocked on farmhouse doors to hand out tracts. Her temperament did nothing to lighten the Buffett family tendencies. In fact by some accounts Henrietta was the preachingest of all the preaching Buffetts who had ever lived. The Buffetts were tradespeople not members of the merchant or professional class but as pioneer settlers of Omaha they were exceedingly conscious of their place. Henriettas hope was that her four sons and daughter would become the first in the family to graduate from college. To pay for their schooling she pared her household budget more than was strictly necessary it is said even by Buffett standards. All the boys toiled at the family store when they were young. Then Clarence began a career in the oil business with a graduate degree in geology.17 George her second got a PhD in chemistry and wound up on the East Coast. Her three youngest Howard Fred and Alice all graduated from the University of Nebraska. Fred took up duties at the family store and Alice became a home-economics teacher. Howard the third son and Warrens father was born in 103. He had unhappy memories of feeling like an outsider during his years at Central High School in the early 120s. Omaha was run by a handful of families who owned the stockyards banks department stores and had inherited fortunes from the breweries now closed under Prohibition. cMy clothes were pretty much hand-me-downs from my two older brothersd he said cand I was a paperboy and the son of a grocery man. So the high school fraternities didnt look my way and I was just one of the boys from what approximated outside of the tracks.d He felt these snubs keenly; they marked him with a deep revulsion toward rank and privilege acquired by birth.18 cAt the University of Nebraska Howard majored in journalism and worked at the college newspaper the Daily Nebraskan where he was able to combine the outsiders love of reporting on the activities of the powerful with the family fascination with politics. It would not be long before he met Leila Stahl a girl whose background mingled the same interest in newspapers with self-consciousness about social class. Leilas father John Stahl a sweet little dumpling of a man of good German-American descent had traveled Cuming County Nebraska in a horse and buggy with a buffalo robe on his lap as superintendent of schools.1 The family history says he adored his wife Stella who gave him three daughters Edith Leila and Bernice and one son Marion. Of English descent Stella was unhappy living in West Point Nebraska a town of German-American hausfraus where she never felt at ease. It is said that she consoled herself by playing the pipe organ. In 10 Stella suffered a mental breakdown. This must have seemed an ominous recurrence of family history for her mother Susan Barber who was described as cmaniacald had been an inmate of the Nebraska State Insane Asylum where she died in 18. After an incident in which according to family lore Stella went after Edie with the fireplace poker John Stahl gave up his traveling job to care for their children. Increasingly Stella retreated to her darkened room where she sat twisting her hair apparently depressed. This isolation was punctuated by occasional episodes of cruel behavior toward her husband and the girls.20 Stahl realizing that he could not leave the children alone with their mother bought a newspaper the Cuming County Democrat so he could make a living working from home. From the time Leila was five she and her sisters essentially ran the household and helped their father put out the paper. She learned to spell by setting type. cWhen I was in the fourth graded she recounted cwe had to come home from school and set type before we could go out and play.d By age eleven she could run a jackhammer of a Linotype press and every Friday she missed school because of the headaches she suffered after having to get out the paper on Thursday night. Living above the business in a house infested by mice the family pinned all their hopes for the future on Marion the brilliant brother who was studying to be a lawyer. During World War I the Stahls difficulties grew. When the Cuming County Democrat came out against Germany in a German-American town half their subscribers dropped the paper and switched to the West Point Republican  a financial catastrophe. John Stahl himself was an ardent supporter of the Democratic political giant William Jennings Bryan. At the turn of the century Bryan had been one of the most important politicians of his era nearly becoming President of the United States. In his heyday he stood for a kind of cpopulismd that he set forth in his most famous speech: cThere are two ideas of government. There are those who believe that if you just legislate to make the well-to-do prosperous that their prosperity will leak through on those below. The Democratic idea has been that if you legislate to make the masses prosperous their prosperity will find its way up and through every class that rests upon it.d21 The Stahls viewed themselves as part of the masses the class that the rest rested upon. Their ability to bear that load was not increasing. By 118 Leilas sixteen-year-old sister Bernice considered the dullard of the sisters with a tested IQ of 13 had apparently begun to give up on life. She was convinced she would end up mentally ill like her grandmother and mother and die like her grandmother in the Nebraska State Insane Asylum.22 During this time Leilas educational schedule suggests a chaotic home life. She delayed going to college for two years to help her father. After a single semester at the University of Nebraska in Lincoln she returned home for another year to help out again.23 Energetic and considered the brightest of. This book is talk about Warren Buffett and his experience in Stock Market."]