[Buffett of course had his own views about pyramids and pharaohs but he liked Annenberg and was happy to play golf with him. Though he would never spend his money that way Buffett believed that people had the right to spend their own money any way they chose. Besides he would never dream of criticizing the ambassador. Annenberg paired Buffett that weekend with Reagan as a golf partner so Secret Service agents trailed them—but refused to fetch golf balls out of water traps as Buffett had hoped. Buffett had a mixed view of Reagan as President. He admired Reagan’s handling of geopolitics. However under Reagan the United States went from being the world’s largest lender to its largest borrower. Just as junk bonds and leverage were ballooning on Wall Street the government had been running up mountains of debt—which Buffett considered the Wimpy style of economics: I will gladly pay you Tuesday for a hamburger today.60 Buffett’s style was to own the cattle ranch—and he had the balance sheet to prove it. Armored by Berkshire Hathaway’s balance sheet—and a golf scorecard signed by the President of the United States—Buffett was now a fortress of power a fount of widely acclaimed wisdom. After his role rescuing Scott Fetzer people thought of him as a high-profile protector. Every financial statistic pertaining to him and his company rang with exclamation points. Berkshire Hathaway’s book value per share had grown by more than twenty-three percent a year for twenty-three years! Buffett’s first group of partners had reaped $1.1 million for each $1000 put into the partnership! Berkshire was trading at the dizzying price of $2950 per share! Buffett himself had a net worth of $2.1 billion! A Wall Street money manager—an investor—was the ninth-richest man in the U.S.! Never in history had anyone climbed from the ranks of those who managed other people’s wealth to join the celebrated few on top of the feeding chain of riches. For the first time the money from a partnership of investors had been used to grow an enormous business enterprise through a chess-game series of decisions to buy whole businesses as well as stocks. Inevitably more people were going to call him for help. The next person to pick up the phone was John Gutfreund the man who ran Salomon Brothers and had endeared himself to Buffett by helping to save GEICO in 1976. That he had done so showed both the strength and weakness of Salomon. The GEICO stock underwriting had been based on the opinion of one equity research analyst. If the firm had any stature in the marketplace of selling stocks it would have passed on the deal as far too small to be worth the legal liability if it failed—as all the other firms had done. But Salomon bold and decisive rather than bureaucratic dared the risk because it needed the business. Buffett had always taken a liking to people who extended themselves and helped him make money. And Gutfreund’s reserved intellectual prep-school personality coupled with a domineering brutality seems to have added to Buffett’s trust in him as overseer of an unruly-by-nature investment bank. Gutfreund had grown up the son of a well-to-do meat-truck company owner in Scarsdale New York a golf-course-ringed suburb of commuters close to New York City. He’d majored in literature at Oberlin College and considered teaching English but was drawn to the trading floor by a golfing friend of his father’s Billy Salomon a descendant of one of the firm’s three founding brothers. Salomon Brothers was born in 1910 when Arthur Herbert and Percy Salomon carrying $5000 of capital knocked on Wall Street’s doors to broker short-term loans. Less than a decade later the U.S. government became the tiny firm’s client by adding Salomon to its list of registered dealers of government securities. With this endorsement Salomon a game little terrier scrapped its way to respectable size over the next three 0cdecades by sticking to its core business of trading bonds using its wits nerve and fidelity to clients.61 Meanwhile dozens of other small brokers closed shop or were swallowed up by larger ones. Billy Salomon had installed Gutfreund as a trading assistant. Joining a roomful of men who spent their days buying and selling bonds for clients on the phone Gutfreund like the rest carved off a little slice of everything for Salomon in return for his labors. He proved a deft trader and made partner in 1963 at the age of thirty-four. Partners at Salomon were bound by the edict of Billy Salomon all of their interests welded together by the capital he forced them to leave at risk in the firm—instead of taking it out year by year as bonuses and profits. In 1978 Billy Salomon promoted Gutfreund to head of the firm then retired. Three years later Gutfreund showed up on his friend and mentor’s beachfront porch in East Hampton to say that he was selling Salomon to Phibro a giant commodities dealer to create Phibro-Salomon Inc. Gutfreund and his partners walked away with an average of nearly $8 million apiece in profit from the sale while those who had built the firm and were now retired—like Billy Salomon—got zero zilch.62 One former partner thought it a Greek tragedy: the story of Oedipus who had killed his own father. Gutfreund became co-CEO with Phibro’s David Tendler. Running a firm with a co-CEO is like trying to balance two ends of a seesaw in the air. When Phibro’s business slumped after the sale just as Salomon’s was soaring Gutfreund wasted no time. He slammed his end of the seesaw to the ground and sent Tendler flying. After Gutfreund took control he added a foreign-currency business broadened into equity trading and underwriting and expanded the bond business into Japan Switzerland and Germany. For the next few years the witch doctors from academia with their computers and formulas filtered onto Wall Street and Phibro- Salomon’s floor became populated with PhDs who unlocked the mathematical secrets of stripping slicing packaging and trading mortgages and other bonds. By inventing a whole new segment of the bond market Salomon (for the Phibro-Salomon name never quite replaced “Solly” in people’s minds and was dumped in 1986) grew in a few short years from a second-tier firm to the top of the Street with a swagger to match as its traders stayed many steps ahead of other banks. They ruled from “The Room” Solly’s trading floor a smoky palace about a third the size of an airplane hangar filled with long double rows of desks where the traders salespeople and assistants crouched in front of banks of screens with a slice of pizza in one hand and a telephone receiver in the other. The daily battle took place as a symphony of groans and curses and farts and screams punctuating the background babble yelps and mutterings of trader talk. Eccentrics were welcome as long as they produced. Gutfreund shot down the aisles every morning from his desk on the floor as if fired from a cannon. He glared through horn-rimmed spectacles chomping his stogie and shredded screwups into piles of mulch on the trading floor. The characters on the trading floor bartered with a camaraderie born of competition and a united obsession with killing the other team. They so dominated the bond-underwriting market that BusinessWeek crowned Salomon “The King of Wall Street.”63 The story also said it was the kind of place where the “long knives” could come out if things went south—in other words that Gutfreund would purge anyone suspected of dissent in order to still a revolt.64 Salomon’s profits peaked in 1985 when the firm made $557 million after tax. But the new businesses —principally equities—didn’t earn their keep; thus internal competition started to get out of hand. The traders who had built Salomon’s unique and profitable business started to leave enticed by million-dollar offers from other firms. Soon they populated Salomon’s competitors. Gutfreund ratcheted the pay upward to stem the tide. But he did not crack down on departments like equity trading and investment banking when they failed to produce then came in with new five-year plans to fix their failures. His intimidating personality covered a soft underbelly: He shrank from hard decisions and substantive confrontations. As time passed he spent less time in The Room and presided with a somewhat distracted air over a kingdom in which the threat of poison hung in the air. “My problem is that I am too deliberate on people issues”65 he would later say. Somewhat unfairly observers blamed not him but his wife Susan. 0cTied to her husband by a long long leash all through the 1980s Susan Gutfreund had raced headlong up Fifth Avenue dragging the once-retiring silver-haired CEO of Salomon behind her into international society. Gutfreund came to tolerate and even enjoy it because he said she expanded his horizons. With Susan blowing with the force of a nor’easter he turned his rudder and ran into the wind. Modesty and thrift were the first to go overboard. “It’s so expensive to be rich” the former flight attendant complained—perhaps facetiously but nonetheless famously—to Malcolm Forbes.66 Susan’s party guests received chauffeur-delivered invitations tied with yellow roses for events that featured four types of caviar. She chilled her perfume in a refrigerator next to her bathtub. She yanked up her Chicago roots to become such a Francophile that her butler answered the phone in French. She greeted First Lady Nancy Reagan at their first meeting “Bonsoir Madame.” At the couple’s River House living room in New York City millions of dollars’ worth of French antiques sat atop a million- dollar rug. She redid Salomon’s executive meeting room drenching it with so much passementerie and ormolu that it “looked like a French bordello.”67 She wore the collection of designer Hubert de Givenchy who lived across the courtyard from the Gutfreunds’ eighteenth-century Paris pied-à-terre. In New York their righteously indignant neighbors sued them when an allegedly unauthorized crane appeared on their penthouse terrace to hoist a twenty-two-foot five-hundred-pound Christmas tree into the Gutfreunds’ living room.68 Thus did Susan Gutfreund become 1980s Nouvelle Society’s most beloved object of parody. The Gutfreunds graced magazine covers and Susan earned a role in Tom Wolfe’s roman à clef The Bonfire of the Vanities.69 Susan’s friends defended her but however overdone the satire might be nobody not even her husband questioned that this outpouring of opulence had diverted his attention at least a little bit.70 A corporate history published around this time included a telling remark. Instead of making a decision and expecting others to follow it said Gutfreund “liked to involve the people who would be affected” and “would bend over backward to make them comfortable with what was to be done.” Nevertheless wrote the author protesting a bit too heartily Gutfreund “is in ultimate control” and “his decisions after consultations are final.”71 In fact some of Gutfreund’s former partners now retitled “managing directors” were mounting a major challenge to his authority. Having kept their commitment to grow they now blamed him for the bloated costs and vied with one another for territory. By the end of 1986 when earnings had begun to sink from the burden of the newly swollen payroll —Salomon had increased its staff by forty percent that year—the managing directors nearly dethroned Gutfreund in a coup. The firm’s largest shareholder the South African company Minorco grew impatient and told Gutfreund it wanted to sell its block of stock. But when “nothing happened” according to several of the managing directors and Salomon’s stock languished as the Dow rose forty-four percent Minorco found its own buyer: Ron Perelman the feared corporate raider who had taken over Revlon. The executive team did not want to work for Perelman and whomever he brought in at the top.72 Gutfreund pushed the panic button and called Buffett asking him to invest in Salomon as “white knight” to save Salomon from Perelman—much as Buffett had saved Ralph Schey at Scott Fetzer from Boesky.73 Owning a company that sold vacuum cleaners was one thing. Even though Salomon was dominated by trading which Buffett liked the firm was muscling its way into investment banking and had recently caved to market pressure and set up a merchant banking business to finance takeovers using junk bonds a technique he despised. The firm was late to the highly competitive merger business still a novice.74 In trying to launch Salomon in these rough waters Gutfreund seemed uncomfortable; he had aged visibly in just one year.75 Yet Salomon’s expertise in reshaping the bond market appealed to Buffett at a time when good stock ideas had become scarce.76 While he denigrated junk bonds he didn’t shun the takeovers that were done using them. In fact he opportunistically arbitraged those deals—shorting the stock of the acquirer and buying the stock of the acquiree. Since Salomon’s bond arbitrage unit made most of the firm’s profits the firm in fact was an arbitrage machine and he had a deep affinity and respect for this corner of Wall Street. 0cMoreover Buffett’s nostrils had caught the rich warm scent of money for Gutfreund had the air of desperation. So he said that Berkshire would buy $700 million of Salomon preferred stock as long as it made fifteen percent.77 Gutfreund ordered his horrified employees to design a security that would deliver to Buffett the kind of returns normally earned only on a junk bond. Over the weekend of Rosh Hashanah the Jewish New Year when Gutfreund knew the observant Perelman would be neutralized Buffett flew to New York and he and Gutfreund met at Salomon’s lawyers’ offices. Buffett walked in by himself without a briefcase or even a pad of paper in his hand. Over a handshake he agreed to buy a preferred stock with a nine percent coupon that would convert to common stock at the price of $38.78 The nine percent yield gave Buffett a premium return until the stock went to $38 when he had the right to convert to equity. So the upside was unlimited. But if the stock went down he had the right to “put” the security back to Salomon and get his money back.79 The deal worked out to an expected fifteen percent profit on an investment that carried very little risk.80 The annual dividends on this preferred stock—$63 million—were more than Blue Chip and Berkshire had spent on the Buffalo Evening News and See’s Candies together. Inside Salomon people were outraged.81 They felt that Gutfreund had dithered on the Minorco request then called Buffett in desperation and had to overprice the convertible as a result. And thus for his huge fifteen percent return Buffett was as writer Michael Lewis would later explain making “only the safe bet that Salomon would not go bankrupt.”82 What the firm had bought with all this money was Buffett’s reputation which came partly at the expense of Gutfreund’s power. Along with the deal Buffett and Munger each got board seats. Before signing the papers Buffett climbed aboard his new jet and flew to New York. He met Munger at One New York Plaza to inspect Salomon. Standing outside Gutfreund’s office next to the trading floor he beheld The Room for the first time. Hundreds of disheveled people sweated in front of tiny green screens. Most had phones glued to each ear as they jostled spat puffed and spun their way through multimillion-dollar deals. Curses and screams cut through the low roar that filled the air. Above the scene hung a hazy fog. So many traders calmed their nerves with tobacco why bother to abstain? Everyone’s lungs were always filled with nicotine anyway. Munger crossed his arms and turned to Buffett. “So Warren” he said. “You really want to invest in this huh?” Buffett stood gazing out through the haze over the pandemonium that he was about to buy. “Mmmm- hmmmm” he said after a long pause.83 47 White Nights New York City • 1987–1991 Observers stood slack-jawed that the Midas from Omaha had gilded the mighty Salomon Brothers with his touch. Buffett—the burger-chomping billionaire next door who drove an eight-year-old Cadillac lived in his original $31500 house and possessed few of the tokens of the rich and famous—owned a major investment in a Wall Street bank. He routinely railed against the Wall Street of which he was now very much a part. He wrote the Berkshire 0cshareholders excoriating the junk bonds used to finance takeovers—including Salomon’s—which he said were “sold by those who didn’t care to those who didn’t think.”1 “I never talk to brokers or analysts” he said. “You have to think about things yourself…. Wall Street is the only place people ride to in a Rolls-Royce to get advice from people who take the subway.”2 On the pages of the Washington Post he had decried the “casino society” that was making the corporate raiders rich. Why not tax one hundred percent of the speculators’ profits?3 There was certainly a lot to tax. From 1982 to 1987 the Dow Jones Industrial Average had streaked from 777 to 2722. If you want to make money he told business-school students “hold your nose and go to Wall Street.” But he was already there. The image of Wall Street seducing a Midwestern populist into bed was too good to leave alone. Asked by a reporter why he owned the largest single chunk of Salomon when Wall Street was such a sinkhole Buffett did not hesitate. He had placed his faith in one man. John Gutfreund he said “is an outstanding honorable man of integrity.”4 Buffett always did fall in love with people and observers said he was noticeably in love with Gutfreund—at first. Yet the man who once quit his job as a “prescriptionist” to escape the inherent conflict of interest with his customers couldn’t shield himself with John Gutfreund from the basic fact that he owned part of an investment bank which was riddled with conflicts of interests with its customers. How had he gotten himself into the—at best awkward—position of sitting on the board of such a company?5 It was as if during a dry spell Buffett’s urge to make money had once again overwhelmed his high hopes high aspirations and high principles. And as had been true throughout his life whenever his avarice got the upper hand trouble followed. At the time that Buffett invested in Salomon the market was near a breaking point. In his shareholder letter the previous March he had said that money managers were so hyperkinetic they made “whirling dervishes appear sedated.” He didn’t have a partnership to dissolve but over the next few months he started dumping stocks. He knew that as the market continued upward part of what was driving it was a new invention the “S&P 500 future.” Salomon like all major banks now traded derivative contracts that were a way of betting how high or low the index of S&P 500 stocks would be on a certain date.6 Derivative contracts work like this: In the Rockwood Chocolate deal the value of the futures contract was “derived from” the price of cocoa beans on a certain date. If the beans turned out to be worth less than the price agreed to by the contract the person who had bought the futures contract as insurance “won.” Her losses were covered. If the beans were worth more the person who had sold the futures contract as insurance “won.” The contract entitled him to buy the beans below the then-current market price. Suppose that in the weight deal Buffett had made with Howie for the rent on his farm he didn’t want to risk Howie’s actually losing weight which would drop the rent. Since this was under Howie’s control Warren might want to buy insurance from someone else. He could say to Susie “Lookit I’ll pay you a hundred bucks today. If Howie loses twenty pounds and keeps it off for the next six months you’ll pay me the two thousand dollars of rent that I’ll lose. If he doesn’t keep it off for the whole six months you don’t have to pay me the rent and you get to keep the hundred bucks.” The index that determined the gain or loss was “derived” from Howie’s weight and whether or not Buffett would make such a deal was based on a handicap of the odds that Howie would be able to lose the weight and keep it off. Another example: Suppose that Warren made a deal with Astrid to give up eating potato chips for a year. If he ate a potato chip he had to pay her a thousand bucks. This would not be a derivative contract. Warren and Astrid were simply making a deal. Whether Warren ate a potato chip was not “derived from” anything. It was under his own control. However if Astrid and Warren made that agreement and then Astrid paid Warren’s sister Bertie a hundred bucks as insurance in exchange for a thousand dollars if Astrid lost the bet the deal with Bertie would be a derivative contract. It would be “derived from” whether Warren ate the potato chips which was not under either Bertie’s or Astrid’s control. Astrid stood to lose the hundred bucks to Bertie if Warren didn’t eat the chips and Bertie would lose a thousand bucks if he did. “Derivatives” therefore are either a type of 0cinsurance (for Astrid) or an outright gamble (for Bertie).7 Most people buying and selling derivative contracts do so based on an impersonal index setting the contract without ever meeting their counterparty. The S&P “equity index futures” that money managers were buying as insurance in 1987 paid them back if the stock market fell below a certain level. People who assumed the market would keep going up were often “gambling” by “selling” the insurance. They wanted income from the premiums. Buffett had written to Congress citing the risk inherent in these deals and urging regulation of this market as long ago as 1982 but nothing changed.8 Since then equity index futures had swarmed like gnats in July. If stocks started to fall all the bills would be presented to the sellers of insurance at once. They would have to dump stocks to meet their claims. The buyers of the index futures meanwhile were often using them to insure “program trades” that would sell automatically as the market fell triggering a cascade of sales. By the early fall the market got nervous and began to stutter and stall. On Black Monday October 19 1987 stocks plunged a record-breaking 508 points as everybody tried to squeeze through the keyhole at once. The market came close to a trading halt as it did in 1929 and suffered its largest one-day percentage drop in history.9 * * * The Buffett Group happened to be meeting on the third day of the avalanche this time in Colonial Williamsburg. Kay Graham had been put in charge of the arrangements and she used Williamsburg’s atmospheric celebration of America at its purest most patriotic moment to elevate the meeting from its formerly “slapdash amateur effort by whoever” as Buffett put it to a whole new standard. The group was chauffeured everywhere and members who were used to bran flakes at breakfast woke to find “enough food for a thousand people” as one member described it with chicken steak ham and chicken livers served alongside their eggs. Graham hired Carter’s Grove Plantation a historic eighteenth-century mansion fronting the James River for a formal dinner one night and rented out a theater to screen a movie produced by Rick Guerin some of whose money had been funneled directly into Hollywood. As the events crescendoed each more elaborate than the last the group was awestruck by the contrast with prior years as well as by the expense. “How wonderful of Kay to have us as her guests” Chuck Rickershauser said as everybody in earshot nodded. On the final evening Graham hired costumed chamber musicians to play Haydn during a private dinner at the DeWitt Wallace museum.10 The topic planned for discussion as stocks were peaking had been “Is the Group finished with the market?” Instead with the market crashing around their ears for three days Buffett Tisch Gottesman Ruane Munger Weinberg and the others glowed like fireflies as they flickered in and out of the room checking stock prices and phoning their traders with controlled excitement. Unlike the many people devastated by losses they were buying stocks.11 When the avalanche survivors were dug out of the snow however Warren’s sister Doris—now living in Fredericksburg Virginia the town she had fallen in love with when the family followed Howard to Congress —turned out to be one of the many people who had been “selling” the insurance. She had sold what were called “naked puts” a type of derivative peddled by a Falls Church Virginia broker. Naked puts were promises to cover somebody else’s losses if the market fell—“naked” because they were unclothed by collateral and thus unprotected against loss.12 The broker had emphasized that the naked puts would provide Doris with a steady stream of income which she needed. It is hard to imagine that the broker gave her any kind of realistic description of the risk she was taking especially using a scary term like “naked put.” Doris was unsophisticated about investing but highly intelligent with a hard-nosed common sense. She had not talked to Warren about the investment however. He was famous for recommending only extremely safe low-return investments like Treasury or municipal bonds especially when counseling divorced women. These were investments that he would never make himself. Doris had trusted him enough to become one of 0chis first partners; she trusted him implicitly when it came to investing for Berkshire. But that long-ago childhood episode when Cities Service Preferred went down after he bought it for himself and Doris might have loomed large in both their minds had she asked him for advice. She didn’t ask. Now acting on her own Doris had incurred losses so large that they wiped out her Berkshire stock and threatened her with bankruptcy. Compounding her desperation she had recommended the broker to some of her friends and felt responsible for the money they had lost as well. Doris romanticized her brother viewed him as a protective figure and kept a little shrine to him featuring miniature golf clubs Pepsi bottles and other symbolic accoutrements of his life. But when she had a problem instead of going to Warren she called Susie as a go-between as everyone in the family did. By this time Doris had been married and divorced three times. She felt she had rushed into her first marriage out of insecurity; her second had failed in part because she had felt coerced into it and thus hadn’t fought hard enough to save it. Her third marriage to a college professor in Denver had been a terrible misjudgment. By now Doris had experienced a great deal of mistreatment in her life but rather than letting it cow her she fought back. This time however she didn’t know what to do. “You don’t ever need to worry” Susie had told her about her brother after her third divorce. “He’ll always take care of you.” After she confessed to Susie what she had done and asked for help Warren called her early on a Saturday morning. He said that if he gave her the money to pay her creditors it would only help the businesses to whom she owed money—the counterparties whom she had insured. His logic was that they were speculators; therefore he would not bail them out. As she realized that this meant he was not going to help her she broke out in a cold sweat and her legs started shaking. She was sure this meant that her brother despised her. He felt however that his decision was simply rational. “I could have given a couple million dollars to her creditors if I’d wanted. But you know the hell with them. I mean this broker woman who sold this stuff to Doris—she’d busted everybody in that particular branch.” Doris hoped that Susie would save her. Susie had so much money of her own and Warren gave her so much money most of which she gave away. However just as Susie had not given money to Billy Rogers for a down payment on a house she did nothing now to help Doris financially. The story hit the Washington Post that the sister of “a highly successful investor” had done something extremely dumb. Damaging Warren’s reputation was a serious transgression in the Buffett family and Doris’s timing was terrible. The Buffetts were still trying to recover from Billy Rogers’s fatal overdose just seven months before another event that had publicly bared the problems beneath the family’s wholesome surface. Warren may have known—on some level—that he was rationalizing. Certainly he feared Doris’s ire; when she felt threatened—like Kay Graham—Doris defended herself as if cornered. Warren of all people genuinely understood his sister—but he could not tolerate shrill behavior from anyone not even her. So he retreated. He stopped calling and nobody else in the family contacted Doris. She felt as though the family had cut her off. Frightened at being abandoned and deeply wounded Doris browbeat her mother for money and loans to prevent her from losing her home.13 Ironically the Federal Reserve had lowered interest rates companies were buying their own stocks and the market was recovering quickly from the debacle leaving only victims like Doris behind in its wake. In a sort of panic she married Al Bryant the lawyer who was helping her with her legal difficulties. But behind the scenes Warren was arranging to advance his sister $10000 a month from the trust left by Howard’s will. “That was more money than I have ever spent in my whole life” she says. The tension deescalated; they were able to speak. She was almost prostrate with gratitude—until she realized that this was her own money which she was simply being paid early. At the time her share of the trust having grown from a little over 2000 shares of Berkshire that were worth $30000 in 1964 was valued at about $10 million. The trust was not structured to pay out until Leila died when Doris and Bertie would receive the money in four installments. As a further olive branch however her brother set up the Sherwood Foundation 0cwhich paid out $500000 a year in charitable gifts. Doris Warren’s children and Astrid could each allocate $100000 to any causes they chose. The annual income produced was as if her brother had put around $7 million into a trust for the five of them. Doris’s share therefore was almost as much as if Warren had given her the money after all but in a different form. Of course it was not in a form she could use to pay her debts or save her house—Warren never gave money outright only in an earmarked manner that he controlled. Still as the storm subsided Doris regained perspective. She was grateful that he had gotten over his embarrassment and had helped her in his own way. She was acutely aware that without him she would have had nothing in the first place. As she scraped together the money to pay her debts their relationship gradually returned to normal and the shrine stayed in place on her wall. The other victim of the crash that Buffett had to deal with was Salomon. Only three months after Berkshire’s investment he and Munger attended their first board meeting. The topic of the day was the slump in trading and merger business at Salomon and the $75 million that Black Monday had cost the firm.14 Salomon faced the cleanup from Black Monday weakened by the fact that only days before the crash Gutfreund his moon-shaped face impassive had head-chopped even highly valued longtime employees laid off eight hundred people and discontinued marginally profitable businesses such as commercial paper trading (a backwater of the bond business) so abruptly that the disruption hurt relationships with some important clients almost beyond repair.15 These and the losses from Black Monday were going to gouge a deep hole in the shareholders’ pockets that year. And with that Salomon’s stock fell into the tank. The shareholders were suffering yet the compensation committee—which Buffett had joined at the request of its chairman Bob Zeller—began to discuss lowering the price at which the employees’ stock options could be exercised. These options were rights to buy stock at a specified price in the future. If Salomon had been See’s Candies it would be as if Buffett paid the line workers partly in pieces of paper that gave them the right to buy candy at a set price. If the price of candy kept going up every year those pieces of paper kept increasing in value as time went along. However right now the candy factory was having a bad year. See’s was going to lose money and its employees would suffer a cut in wages. The compensation committee was talking about lowering the price the workers would have to pay for candy to make up the difference. Buffett argued against this. The candy factory belonged to the owners—the shareholders—not the employees.16 He wanted the employees’ share of candy trimmed by exactly the amount that earnings had declined.17 The other members of the committee however felt the workers had been promised candy worth a certain amount when Gutfreund announced their packages a couple of months before and when the candy went on sale they were obligated to make up the difference. Perhaps they were trying to forestall the traditional Wall Street bonus-day stampede that occurs whenever people are unhappy: Take the money and run. Buffett felt this was morally wrong. Since the shareholders weren’t getting their earnings why should the employees get their candy? The others outvoted him two to one. He was outraged.18 But his role on the Salomon board was mostly titular. His advice was rarely sought and less often taken. Even though Salomon stock by then was starting to recover the repricing of the stock options he says “almost immediately” made his investment in Salomon “way less attractive financially than it had been. “I could have fought harder and been more vocal. I might have felt better about myself if I did. But it wouldn’t have changed the course of history. Unless you sort of enjoy combat it doesn’t make sense.” Buffett’s willingness to do combat—even in a roundabout way—had diminished markedly since the days of Sanborn Map Dempster and the Buffetting of Seabury Stanton. “I don’t enjoy battles. I won’t run from them if I need to do it but I don’t enjoy them at all. When it came to the board Charlie and I didn’t even vote against it. We voted yes. We didn’t even abstain because abstaining is the same thing as throwing down the gauntlet. And there were other things at Salomon. One 0cthing after another would come up that I thought was nutty but they didn’t want me to say anything. And then the question is do you say anything? I don’t get in fights just to get in fights.” Buffett had been originally attracted to Gutfreund the reserved thoughtful man in love with his work who arrived every day at seven a.m. lit up the first of his huge Temple Hall Jamaican cigars and wandered among the shirtsleeved traders to tell them “You’ve got to be ready to bite the ass off a bear every morning.”19 Indeed it appeared to employees who made presentations in board meetings that Buffett was a “relatively passive” board member.20 He seemed to understand little of the details of how the business was run and adjusting to a business that wasn’t literally made of bricks-and-mortar or run like an assembly line was not easy for him. 21 Since he had made the investment in Salomon purely because of Gutfreund and now didn’t like the way it was working out he always had another choice which was to sell his investment and resign from the board.22 Wall Street boiled with rumors that Buffett and Gutfreund had had a falling out; that Buffett was either going to sell or to fire Gutfreund and bring in someone else to run the firm.23 But it hadn’t come to that. Someone as prominent as Buffett selling and resigning from the board as a major investor would be a shocking gesture that would drive down Salomon’s stock price and cost his own shareholders as well as make him look capricious or vindictive or unreliable. By now his reputation had become part of Berkshire’s value. Moreover he hadn’t given up on Gutfreund. His whole reason for investing was Gutfreund and when Buffett threw his arms around someone it took an ax to split them apart. Thus as the holidays approached he and Gutfreund struggled uneasily to work out their differences. Meanwhile the high cost of 1987 was not quite over. A belated note from Katharine Graham to members of the Buffett Group arrived two weeks before the end of the year. Some of them went into shock. She had sent them a bill. As it turned out they had not been her guests. Instead they themselves had been paying for the extravaganza in Williamsburg that Kay had put on! The total was “somewhat breathtaking” she acknowledged adding “I’m really sorry it’s so late and so much. I hope Xmas is still merry and I’m still your friend.”24 Buffett did have a merry Christmas but for another reason: His present to himself was Coca-Cola. It would make up for a great deal of the unhappiness from Salomon. At a White House dinner some time earlier he had reconnected with his old friend Don Keough who was now president and chief operating officer of the company; Keough had convinced him to switch from his own concoction of Pepsi dosed with cherry syrup to the newly introduced Cherry Coke. Buffett tried it and liked it. His family and friends were gobsmacked when the man so famously loyal especially to Pepsi performed this turnaround. For years however KO stock had been too expensive for Buffett to consider. Now however the company had gotten into trouble its bottlers locked in a fierce price war with Pepsi that had taken the price of Coke down to around $38 a share. Rumor said that it had become a takeover target of the dreaded Perelman and the company was buying back its own stock. Although still expensive it had the same quality of a great brand under duress as American Express had had earlier. The way Warren looked at it Coca-Cola was no cigar butt yet it was pouring forth a waterfall of cash and spending only a small portion of that to operate. Its cash flow each year had value; that was something he could quantify in his head. Since he had studied the company for years he knew how much money it had made in the past and he could make a sensible judgment of how much Coca-Cola’s businesses were going to grow for many years in the future.25 Adding up those estimates of cash flow year after year gave him an ultimate value. Predicting the company’s prospects many years from now wasn’t a precise science however. Buffett applied a margin of safety to his estimates. He did this simply by taking a whack at the number rather than using some complicated model or formula. He used no computers or spreadsheets in doing any of these calculations; if the answer didn’t hit him over the head like a caveman’s club in his view the investment wasn’t worth making. After the estimate came the decision. He had to compare what Coca-Cola would ultimately be worth as a business—the bird in the bush—to the bird in the hand which was Berkshire’s cash. Simply by investing the 0ccash in government bonds that had no risk of losing money Berkshire could earn a certain amount over that same period. He compared the two. By that yardstick Coca-Cola was a beauty and in fact there wasn’t any other stock he knew of that stacked up better. Buffett started buying it. When Coca-Cola products turned up at Buffett’s shareholder meeting in 1988 Berkshire shareholders began swigging Coke in imitation of him. They had no idea that through Berkshire they also owned the stock. The meeting took on a whole new tenor that year when a thousand people showed up at the Joslyn Art Museum auditorium. This was the year that the Frozen Corporation no longer a quasi-partnership officially joined big-time corporate America and listed itself on the New York Stock Exchange. The Berkshire meeting had to be delayed because so many people showed up that shareholders were having trouble finding parking spots. Buffett had an inspiration. He rented two school buses and persuaded a few hundred shareholders to follow him after the meeting like the Pied Piper of commerce to the Nebraska Furniture Mart. Part of the appeal was the chance to meet the indomitable Mrs. B about whom Buffett had been writing and talking for five years. The shareholders were so charmed by the tiny tank of a woman perched on her electric cart in the carpet department—and by her prices—that they spent $57000.26 By year’s end the shareholders still did not know that Berkshire had purchased more than fourteen million shares of KO at a cost of almost $600 million.27 Because his every action now moved markets Buffett had gotten special dispensation from the SEC not to disclose his trades for a year. He was buying so much KO stock and the company itself was repurchasing so much that rather than compete against each other and bid up the price “they would buy half and Buffett would buy half” of the daily trading volume according to Walter Schloss.28 Berkshire soon owned more than six percent of the company worth $1.2 billion.29 In March 1989 when his position was revealed the resulting hullaballoo caused so much demand that the New York Stock Exchange had to stop trading the stock to keep the price from skyrocketing out of control. Coca-Cola’s CEO Roberto Goizueta had glowed with delight at the famous investor’s endorsement. He asked Buffett to join his board possibly the most prestigious in North America. Buffett had accepted with alacrity steeped himself in all things Coca-Cola and met a number of new people who were fellow board members including Herbert Allen the blunt-spoken straight-shooting chairman of Allen & Co. The two became allies. Allen invited the Buffetts to his Sun Valley conference which was emerging as the quintessential elephant-bump for corporate CEOs. At Sun Valley investors Hollywood and media moguls met to mingle and play every July.]